doc: Update deploy guide (#1062)
midnightntwrk/midnight-docs: docs/guides/deploy-mn-app.mdx

toc_max_heading_level: 2
---

import Step, { StepsProvider } from "@site/src/components/Step/Step";

# Deploy the hello world contract

> The [Hello World tutorial](../getting-started/hello-world) deploys the contract to a Docker-based local devnet that ships with three pre-funded wallets. This guide takes the same `example-hello-world` repository and points it at **Preprod**, the public Midnight testnet used for final testing before mainnet. The contract you deploy is reachable from any Preprod indexer and visible in the public block explorer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [Hello World tutorial](../getting-started/hello-world) deploys the contract to a Docker-based local devnet with pre-funded wallets. In this guide, you deploy the same `example-hello-world` contract to **Preprod**, the public Midnight testnet used for final testing before mainnet. After deployment, the contract is visible on the Preprod block explorer and reachable from any Preprod indexer.
```

## Prerequisites

Before you begin, ensure you have:

- Completed the [Hello World tutorial](../getting-started/hello-world) against the local devnet (`yarn test:local` passing).
- A clone of [`example-hello-world`](https://github.com/midnightntwrk/example-hello-world) with the contract already compiled (`contracts/managed/hello-world/` populated).
- A Midnight-compatible wallet (such as Lace or 1AM) configured for the Preprod network, or an existing 24-word mnemonic / 64-character hex seed you control.
- Docker engine running (the proof server runs as a container).

<StepsProvider>
<Step>

## Generate a wallet

> You need a wallet on the Preprod network to sign the deployment and call transactions. The test suite accepts either a 24-word BIP-39 mnemonic or a 64-character hex seed — pick whichever your wallet exports.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You need a wallet on the Preprod network to sign the deployment and call transactions. The test suite accepts either a 24-word BIP-39 mnemonic or a 64-character hex seed; pick whichever your wallet exports.
```

**Using a Midnight-compatible wallet** (such as Lace or 1AM):
1. In your wallet, switch the network to **Preprod** and create a new wallet. Save the seed phrase securely.

> 2. Note your **Unshielded** address — you'll paste it into the faucet in the next step.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Note your **Unshielded** address. You will paste it into the faucet in the next step.
```

> The same seed phrase your wallet displays during setup is what you'll paste into `.env.preprod` later.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Paste this seed phrase into `.env.preprod` in step 3.
```

**Bring your own key**: Any 24-word BIP-39 mnemonic or 64-hex-character seed works. The test suite derives both the shielded and unshielded keys from it.

</Step>
<Step>

## Fund the wallet with tNIGHT and tDUST

Preprod transactions are paid in **tDUST**, which is generated by holding (and delegating) **tNIGHT**. Funding is a two-stage process:

> 1. **Get tNIGHT from the faucet**: Open the [Preprod faucet](https://midnight-tmnight-preprod.nethermind.dev/), paste your Unshielded address, and click **Request tokens**. You should receive 1000 tNIGHT within a couple of minutes.

Reviewer: The faucet URL here (`midnight-tmnight-preprod.nethermind.dev`) differs from the one used elsewhere in the docs (`faucet.preprod.midnight.network`). Which is current?

Author: `faucet.preprod.midnight.network` has been deprecated in favor of `nethermind.dev` -- it has been updated throughout the docs. If there are lingering references, they should be updated.

https://midnightfoundation.slack.com/archives/C0B0643TNMU/p1780614030030789

> 1. **Get tNIGHT from the faucet**: Open the [Preprod faucet](https://midnight-tmnight-preprod.nethermind.dev/), paste your Unshielded address, and click **Request tokens**. You should receive 1000 tNIGHT within a couple of minutes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Get tNIGHT from the faucet**: Open the [Preprod faucet](https://midnight-tmnight-preprod.nethermind.dev/), paste your Unshielded address, and click **Request tokens**. The faucet sends 1000 tNIGHT within a couple of minutes.
```

> 2. **Delegate to start generating tDUST**: Use your wallet's delegation flow to delegate your tNIGHT and begin generating spendable tDUST. The exact label varies by wallet (for example, Lace and 1AM each provide their own delegation UI). Without tDUST the test script will fail with `Wallet.InsufficientFunds`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **Delegate to start generating tDUST**: Use your wallet's delegation flow to delegate your tNIGHT and begin generating spendable tDUST. The exact label varies by wallet. Without tDUST the test script fails with `Wallet.InsufficientFunds`.
```

> For more detail on faucet flow and troubleshooting, see [Get faucet tokens](./acquire-tokens).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For faucet troubleshooting, see [Get faucet tokens](./acquire-tokens).
```

:::tip Verify balances before continuing

> Confirm both tNIGHT and tDUST balances in your wallet before running the test. Wait until the tDUST balance is non-zero — DUST generation begins only after the delegation transaction is confirmed on-chain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Confirm both tNIGHT and tDUST balances in your wallet before running the test. Wait until the tDUST balance is non-zero. DUST generation begins only after the network confirms the delegation transaction on-chain.
```

:::

</Step>
<Step>

## Configure `.env.preprod`

> The repo ships with an example file that shows the exact format the test script expects. From the repository root:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The repo ships with an example file. From the repository root:
```

```bash
cp .env.preprod.example .env.preprod
```

> Open `.env.preprod` and **set only one** of the two variables. Delete the other line entirely — defining both raises an error.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Open `.env.preprod` and **set only one** of the two variables. Delete the other line entirely. Defining both raises an error.
```

```bash
# Use this line if your wallet exports a 24-word phrase:
MIDNIGHT_PREPROD_MNEMONIC=word1 word2 word3 ... word24

# Or this line if you have a raw seed (hex, no 0x prefix):
MIDNIGHT_PREPROD_SEED=abcd1234...                  # 64 hex characters
```

:::warning Keep `.env.preprod` private
The file contains the secret that controls your Preprod wallet. It is already listed in `.gitignore`; do not commit it, share it, or paste it into chat.
:::

</Step>
<Step>

## Start the proof server

> The proof server generates the zero-knowledge proofs the test submits to the network. On Preprod you only need the proof server itself, not the rest of the local devnet stack (no local node or indexer is required — the test connects to the public Preprod endpoints).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The proof server generates the zero-knowledge proofs the test submits to the network. On Preprod you only need the proof server itself, not the rest of the local devnet stack (the test connects to the public Preprod endpoints, so no local node or indexer is required).
```

> The proof server generates the zero-knowledge proofs the test submits to the network. On Preprod you only need the proof server itself, not the rest of the local devnet stack (no local node or indexer is required — the test connects to the public Preprod endpoints).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The proof server generates zero-knowledge proofs for your transactions. On Preprod, you run only the proof server, not the full local devnet stack. The test connects to the public Preprod node and indexer directly.
```

In a separate terminal, from the project root:

```bash
yarn proof:up
```

This starts only the `proof-server` service from `compose.yml` and waits for it to become healthy on `http://127.0.0.1:6300`.

</Step>
<Step>

## Run the test against Preprod

Back in your main terminal:

```bash
yarn test:preprod
```

> The script will:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The script:
```

1. Build a wallet from the secret in `.env.preprod`.

> 2. Sync the wallet against the Preprod indexer. This can take a long time on first run — the default sync timeout is 60 minutes for remote networks (versus 10 for local). The log emits one line per state emission so you can watch progress.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Sync the wallet against the Preprod indexer. This can take a long time on first run (the default sync timeout is 60 minutes for remote networks, versus 10 for local). The log emits one line per state emission so you can watch progress.
```

3. Verify funds are available and register the wallet for DUST generation if not already registered.
4. Deploy the `hello-world` contract and submit a call to `storeMessage("Hello World!")`.

A successful run ends with output similar to:

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```text
```

INFO: Wallet sync complete after 23 emissions
INFO: Wallet NIGHT balance on 'preprod': ...
INFO: Providers initialized on 'preprod'. Ready to test!
INFO: Creating private state...
INFO: Setting the contract address...
INFO: Contract deployed at: bba6579743ae23b44301d4a9f8df30dbd5244d63a59d8fbc2c9fc7ea521a04f8
 ✓ src/test/hw.test.ts (2 tests)
   ✓ Hello World Contract (preprod) > Deploys the contract
   ✓ Hello World Contract (preprod) > Stores Hello World!
```

</Step>
<Step>

## Verify on the block explorer

Copy the contract address from the log line `Contract deployed at: ...` and look it up on a Preprod explorer:

- [preprod.midnightexplorer.com](https://preprod.midnightexplorer.com/)
- [midnight-preprod.subscan.io](https://midnight-preprod.subscan.io/)

> You should see the deploy transaction and the subsequent call transaction.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The explorer shows the deploy transaction and the subsequent call transaction.
```

</Step>
<Step>

## Shut down

When you're done, stop the proof server:

```bash
yarn proof:down
```

The container exits but its image stays cached for the next run.

</Step>
</StepsProvider>

## Troubleshooting

> **`Wallet.InsufficientFunds`** — The wallet has no spendable tDUST. Confirm in your wallet that the tDUST balance is non-zero (not just tNIGHT). DUST generation only starts after the delegation transaction is confirmed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**`Wallet.InsufficientFunds`**: The wallet has no spendable tDUST. Confirm in your wallet that the tDUST balance is non-zero (not just tNIGHT). DUST generation only starts after the delegation transaction is confirmed.
```

> **Sync never completes** — Preprod sync from a brand-new wallet can be slow. If you hit the default 60-minute timeout, raise it with the `MIDNIGHT_SYNC_TIMEOUT_MS` environment variable:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Sync never completes**: Preprod sync from a brand-new wallet can be slow. If you hit the default 60-minute timeout, raise it with the `MIDNIGHT_SYNC_TIMEOUT_MS` environment variable:
```

```bash
MIDNIGHT_SYNC_TIMEOUT_MS=7200000 yarn test:preprod   # 2 hours
```

> **`Set only one of MIDNIGHT_PREPROD_MNEMONIC or MIDNIGHT_PREPROD_SEED`** — Both variables are defined in `.env.preprod`. Delete one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**`Set only one of MIDNIGHT_PREPROD_MNEMONIC or MIDNIGHT_PREPROD_SEED`**: You defined both variables in `.env.preprod`. Delete one.
```

> **Proof server unreachable** — Check `yarn proof:up` finished and `http://127.0.0.1:6300` responds. If port 6300 is in use, stop the conflicting process or change the host port in `compose.yml`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Proof server unreachable**: Check that `yarn proof:up` finished and `http://127.0.0.1:6300` responds. If port 6300 is in use, stop the conflicting process or change the host port in `compose.yml`.
```

> ## Run on Preview instead

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Deploy to Preview
```
